General Instructions :
Read the following instructions very carefully and strictly follow them :
(i) This question paper comprises four sections - A, B, C and D.
(ii) There are 37 questions in the question paper. All questions are compulsory.
(iii) Section A - Question nos. 1 to 20 are very short answer type questions, carrying one mark each.
(iv) Section B - Question nos. 21 to 27 are short answer type questions, carrying two marks each.
(v) Section C - Question nos. 28 to 34 are long answer type questions, carrying three marks each.
(vi) Section D - Question nos. 35 to 37 are also long answer type questions, carrying five marks each.
(vii) There is no overall choice in the question paper. However, an internal choice has been provided in 2 questions of one mark, 2 questions of two marks, 1 question of three marks and all the 3 questions of five marks. You have to attempt only one of the choices in such questions.
(viii) In addition to this, separate instructions are given with each section and question, wherever necessary.
(ix) Use of calculators and log tables is not permitted.
(x) You may use the following values of physical constants wherever necessary :
c = 3 ? 108 m/s
h = 6.63 ? 10-34 Js
e = 1.6 ? 10-19 C
?0 = 4? ? 10-7 T m A-1
?0 = 8.854 ? 10-12 C2 N-1 m-2

1


4 ??0

= 9 ? 109 N m2 C-2

Mass of electron (me) = 9.1 ? 10-31 kg Mass of neutron = 1.675 ? 10-27 kg Mass of proton = 1.673 ? 10-27 kg
Avogadro's number = 6.023 ? 1023 per gram mole Boltzmann constant = 1.38 ? 10-23 JK-1

SECTION A
Note :	Select the most appropriate option from the options given below each question :
1. When the temperature of an n-type semiconductor is increased, then the	1
(A) number of free electrons increases while that of the holes decreases.
(B) number of holes increases while that of the free electrons decreases.
(C) number of free electrons and holes remains unchanged.
(D) number of both the free electrons and the holes increase equally.
2. The figure shows the energy level diagram of hydrogen atom with few transitions.	Which	transition	shows	the	emission	of	photon	with maximum energy ?								1













(A) I	(B)	II
(C)	III	(D)	IV
3. A charge particle is placed between the plates of a charged parallel plate capacitor. It experiences a force F. If one of the plates is removed, the force on the charge particle becomes	1
(A) F	(B)	2F

(C)

F	(D)	Zero
2

4. A window is provided in the middle of a wall. Its image is obtained on the opposite wall at a distance 'd' from it using a lens. If the window and its image are of the same size, then the focal length of the lens used is	1

(A)	+
(C)	-

d	(B)	+ d
4	2
d	(D)	- d
4	2

5. A heavy particle initially at rest splits spontaneously into two particles of
masses m1 and m2 having non-zero velocities. The ratio of de Broglie wavelengths associated with the particles is	1
(A) m1 / m2	(B)	m2 / m1
(C)	1	(D)	?
6. Two particles of masses m1 and m2 have equal charges. They are accelerated from rest through a potential difference V and then enter in a
?
region of uniform magnetic field B . If they describe circular paths of
radii r1 and r2, respectively, then the value of m1 / m2 is	1
? r ?2	r V

(A)

?  2 ?
(B) 
 1	

? r1 ?	r B

?	?
? r ?2

2
r2 V

(C)

?  1 ?
? r2 ?

(D)

1
r2B

?	?	2
7. An air-filled parallel plate capacitor is connected across a battery. The battery remains connected and a dielectric slab is inserted inside the capacitor to fill the space completely. Then the	1
(A) charge on the capacitor will increase.
(B) electric field between the plates will increase.
(C) capacitance of the capacitor will decrease.
(D) potential difference between the plates will increase.
8. An electron and a neutron have equal de Broglie wavelengths. It implies
that they have equal	1

(A)	kinetic energy(B)linear momentum(C)	linear velocity(D)angular velocity9. In Young's double slit experiment, the interfering waves from the two

sources have a path difference of 0 and

?  at points P and Q on the
4

screen, respectively. The ratio of intensities at P and Q will be	1

(A)
(C) 1 :

: 1	(B)	4 : 1
(D) 2 : 1

10. A conducting wire is bent in the shape of a square and another wire of equal length into a circle. If they carry equal currents, their magnetic moments are in the ratio of	1
(A) 2 : ?	(B)	? : 2
(C)	? : 4	(D)	4 : ?
Note :	Fill in the blanks with appropriate answer.
11. A magnetic needle free to rotate in a vertical plane orients itself vertically at a certain place on earth. The value of angle of dip at this place is 	.	1
12. In a single slit diffraction experiment, the phase difference between the waves originating from the two edges of the slit at the first minimum of
the diffraction pattern is 	rad.	1
13. An electron in hydrogen atom jumps from state n = 3 to n = 1. The change
in the angular momentum of the electron will be 	.	1
OR
The energy equivalent of 10 g of a substance is 	J.	1
14. Young's double slit experiment is performed by using green, red and blue monochromatic light sources, one at a time. The value of the fringe width
will be maximum in case of 	light.	1
15. The potential barrier of a p-n junction tends to prevent the movement of
	from n-side to p-side.	1
Note :	Answer the following questions :
16. A cell of emf 'E' and internal resistance 'r' is connected across a variable external resistor 'R'. Plot the variation of voltage drop 'V' across the resistor as a function of 'R'.	1
17. The sequence of successive decay of a radioactive nucleus is shown as under :

D  ??x ? D

?-	D

1	2 ????	3
If the atomic number and mass number of D1 are 72 and 180 and those of
D3 are 71 and 176 respectively, identify the particle x.	1
OR

The three curves shown below, represent the variation of photocurrent and applied voltage for two different materials using two different intensities of a monochromatic light. Identify the two curves which are
for the same material.	1

18. A biconvex lens made up of glass of refractive index 1·5, forms a real image of an object in air. If the whole set-up were immersed in a liquid of refractive index 1·7, then how will the nature of the image be affected ?	1
19. The I - V characteristics of two wires X and Y at constant temperatures are shown in the figure. The two wires have equal lengths and diameters.
Which of them is made up of material of larger resistivity ?	1


20. Define the SI unit of capacitance.	1



SECTION B
21. Identify the type of electromagnetic waves that can be produced in the process given below and give one application of each :	2
(a) Bombardment of high energy electrons on a heavy metal target
(b) Radioactive decay of the nucleus

22. Define 'quality factor' of a series LCR circuit at resonance. Suggest two methods to double the values of quality factor without changing the resonant frequency of the circuit.	2
23. Two point charges q and - q are located at (0, 0, - a) and (0, 0, a) respectively.
(a) Depict the equipotential surfaces due to this arrangement.
(b) Find the amount of work done in moving a small test charge q0 from point (l, 0, 0) to (0, 0, 0).	2
24. (a)	Give the sequence of colour bands found on a 47 k? ? 10% carbon resistor.
(b)	Write two properties of manganin which make it a suitable material for making standard resistors.	2
25. Give reasons for the following facts :	2
(a) The zener diode is fabricated using heavily doped p-side and n-side of the junction.
(b) A photodiode used as a detector of optical signals, is operated under reverse bias.
OR
With the help of the circuit diagram, explain the working of a silicon
p-n junction diode in forward biasing and draw its I - V characteristics.	2

26. A radioactive substance is reduced to
1 
th of its original mass after
16

4 days. Find the critical mass of the substance so that 4 g of substance is
left after 6 days.	2
OR
In the Geiger-Marsden experiment, an ?-particle of 5·12 MeV energy approaches a gold target (Z = 79), comes momentarily to rest and then reverses its direction. Find the distance of closest approach of ?-particle
to the target nucleus.	2
27. Draw the plot of the binding energy per nucleon as a function of mass number for different nuclei. The nuclei lying at the middle flat portion of
the curve are more stable. Explain.	2

SECTION C

28. (a)	Explain energy bands in a crystalline silicon semiconductor.
(b) How is an intrinsic semiconductor converted into
(i) p-type, and
(ii) n-type
extrinsic semiconductor ? Draw their energy band diagrams showing impurity level.	3


29. With the help of a ray diagram, explain the formation of image in a compound microscope when the final image is formed at the near point. Obtain the expression for the magnifying power in this case.	3


30. A concave mirror of focal length 12 cm produces three times enlarged image for two different positions of the object.
(a) Draw the ray diagram for the two cases.
(b) Calculate the distance between these two positions of the object.	3


31. Draw the circuit diagram and describe the use of a potentiometer for comparing the emfs of the two primary cells experimentally. Why is potentiometer preferred over a voltmeter for measuring emf of a cell ?	3


32. (a)	With the help of a diagram, explain the working of a cyclotron used to accelerate ions.
(b) What will happen to the motion of the ions if the applied frequency
of the alternating voltage is not equal to the resonance frequency ?	3

33. (a)	Write the principle of working of an ac generator. Derive the expression for the induced emf generated in it.
(b) Write the function of slip rings in an ac generator.	3
OR
In a step-up voltage transformer, explain giving reasons, the following facts :	3
(a) The output current is less than the input current.
(b) The iron core is laminated.
(c) The input power is more than the output power.

34. Light of wavelength ? is incident on a metallic surface of threshold wavelength ?0 (? < ?0) and photoelectrons are emitted.
(a) Write the expression for stopping potential (Vs) for the emitted electrons.
(b) Draw the graph between V and 1 .
?
(c) How can one use this graph to determine the value of Planck's
constant and work function of the metal ?	3

SECTION D

35. (a)  With the help of a diagram, explain the working of a moving coil galvanometer. Justify the necessity of using radial magnetic field in it.
(b) A galvanometer can be converted into a voltmeter to measure up to
(i) V volt by connecting a resistance of 2 k? in series with the galvanometer.
(ii) 2 V volt by connecting a resistance 5 k? in series with the galvanometer.
Calculate the resistance that should be connected in series with the galvanometer to convert it into a voltmeter to measure up to
V volt.	5

2 OR


(a) A conducting rod XY of length l slides on two smooth parallel rails PM and QN with a uniform velocity ?. The resistances of the rod and the rails are negligible.
?
A uniform magnetic field B perpendicular to the plane PMNQ is
present in the region pointing vertically upwards as shown in the figure. A small resistance r is connected between the ends M and N of the rails. Obtain



?
B


(i) the expression for emf induced across the ends of the rod and its polarity.
(ii) the magnitude and direction of induced current that flows through resistance r.
(b) Two coplanar and concentric circular loops are of radii 0·5 cm and 11 cm, respectively. These loops are placed in a uniform external magnetic field of 0·4 T acting perpendicular to their plane.
Calculate the mutual inductance of the arrangement.	5
36. (a)	Draw the ray diagram to show use of total internal reflection in
(i) optical fiber, and
(ii) a prism that bends the ray by 90?.

(b)	A composite prism ABC is made up of two identical right-angled prisms ABD and ADC made up of different materials of refractive
indices	and ? respectively. A ray of light is incident on face AB
of this prism at 60? as shown in the figure. It is observed that the final emergent ray grazes along face AC. Find the value of ?.	5




OR

(a) A point object is kept on the principal axis of a convex spherical
surface of radius of curvature R, separating a medium of refractive index ?2 from a medium of refractive index ?1 (in which the object is kept). A real image of the object is formed by this surface. Draw
the ray diagram to show the image formation and derive the relation between the object distance and image distance in terms of
?1, ?2 and R.

(b) A beam of unpolarised light of intensity 2 mW passes successively through two parallel polarizing sheets P1 and P2. If the angle
between the pass axes of P1 and P2 is made 60?, find the intensity
of light transmitted by P1 and P2.	5

37. (a)  Consider a system of two parallel metal plates of area 'A', each placed at a separation 'd' in air. Derive the expression for the capacitance of this parallel plate capacitor.
(b) If the two plates of the capacitor have + q and - q charges, respectively, find the force experienced by the negative plate due to the positive plate.
(c) A network of four capacitors each of capacitance 12 ?F is connected to a battery as shown in the figure. Find the total charge stored in
the network.	5


OR
(a) State the principle of working of Wheatstone bridge. With the help of a circuit diagram, explain how it is used in the determination of the specific resistance of the material of a wire using meter bridge.
(b) A cell of emf E1 = 2 V and internal resistance r1 = 1 ? is connected to another cell of emf E2 = 8 V and internal resistance r2 = 2 ? through an external resistance of 4 ? as shown in the figure. Find
the potential difference between point A and point C.	5













23












































